Yes, I saw your
>> Good morning everyone. This is uh
lecture B6 of cys rethinking 2026 the
experience section. I want to start
Gaussian processes today. I have way too
many slides. Um so instead of rushing
I'll just go at a sane pace and see what
we can finish. Um and I might finish it
next time. Uh we're going to look at two
data sets today for examples of Gaussian
processes. I'll explain what those are
when we go. Last week we looked at
Nicaragua. Now we're going to the
Pacific and we're going to look at a
anthropological data set that is about
archaeological uh tool kit complexities
in various oceanic societies just the
ones that are marked here. Uh
and here's the data set. It's in the
rethinking package. It's called Klein 2.
Uh this is Michelle Klene who's an
anthropologist put together these data
from the primary literature.
Um uh the outcome of interest are the
number of tool types associated with the
historical population sizes of these
different societies. This example
appears earlier in the book than the
Gaussian process chapter and since it's
the experience section I'm going to
assume you have some passing familiarity
with that. This was the example for plus
on regression earlier in the book. I'm
going to give you a brief reminder of
that um uh what we did there. Uh but not
not completely repeat that lesson.
Apologies. If I had infinite time, I
would of course it's nice, but you can
go back and look at the generalized
linear model. Um uh I think it's god
spike the integers is the neighbor name
of the chapter that the pluson
regression appears in. Uh what we're
going to do with this example is try to
add spatial co-variation to it. Uh
because that's what we weren't able to
do earlier in the book. Us that are
close to one another share lots of
unobserved features sometimes because
there are unmeasured geographical
similarities like stone tool types. Uh
uh Oceanania
mainly they're just like crappy coral
reefs with something that's not really
soil on them, right? And that's so like
um tool stone is rare in the Pacific in
many places. So if you are on an island
with tool stone, boy, you've hit the
jackpot, right? Really amazing stuff. Um
uh there's also places where there's
it's better for making pottery and so
on. And oceanic islands were always in
contact and traded. So spatial proximity
should create similarities in technology
by that. Um so there's two things here
that could generate spatial uh
correlations between um geographically
neighboring societies that is the the uh
properties of the geography the
constituents of the islands uh and also
historical patterns of contact both of
which will be associated with spatial
distance. So how do we get something
like this into a model? uh this is often
called spatial spatial autocorrelation
and there are lots of ways to handle it.
Uh let me remind you when we don't uh
bother dealing with spatial
autocorrelation this is what the
modeling results look like or we're
trying to figure out the association
between population size and the total
number of tools historically and earlier
in the book I I fit these two general
types of models. one the one on the
right is just a basic pluson GLM and I
argued that this is a bad model for
these data because we know the intercept
must be zero when you have zero people
you have zero tools right but this GLM
doesn't believe that somehow it thinks
that a population of zero has tools I
argue that cannot be true lots of things
in anthropology that are uncertain but
you don't get tools without people right
well unless there's like crows in New
Calonia or something like that but they
don't make stone tools to my knowledge
Um and on the left was this uh little
bit more satisfying explicit innovation
loss model where we define uh a
difference equation for the temporal
dynamics of uh the accumulation and loss
of tools and then solve for the
equilibrium of that dynamic equation and
fit that to the data. And this has the
right intercept at least. It's got some
other things missing. So I'm not arguing
this is the final model, but it's to be
a glimpse towards what is a more
satisfying kind of generative process,
but we left out location as a confound.
So I'd like to try to put that in. Um,
here's our core basian workflow. What I
want to problematize here and not really
spend much time on the individual steps
in this workflow today, but is
problematize a generative model because
we're going to be um adjusting for
spatial coariation using something
called a Gaussian process. And a
Gaussian process is not a generative
model.
So it's one of these cases which happens
often in statistics and is sometimes
advantageous where the statistical
solution is quite agnostic to a wide
range of generative models and that may
be something that you like. It's not a
bad thing, but it's a general property
of any particular statistical model that
it will be consistent with a range of
generative models. Um, and so there's
this kind of going backwards in this
workflow thought process where we think
after we've got statistical estimates,
okay, this the statistical model was
inspired by a particular generative
model, but what other generative models
would also produce the same estimates?
Um, and and this we're not going to do
that explicitly in this lecture, but
that's something that is healthy to do.
Lots of scientific mistakes in the
history of science were because people
did not do that, right? neutral
processes. Those of you know me, I rant
about neutral models a lot. Neutral
models have this problem. There's always
a non-neutral model which will produce
the same predictions as a neutral model.
So, it's it's yeah
um remind you uh this is the the dynamic
model that we used. Um I'm going to
mainly ignore this model in this lecture
because I want to focus on Gaussian
processes, but I wanted to remind you
that it was here. Um this is just a
poson regression. What we're going to do
is we're going to keep the the pluson
outcome distribution and instead of
using this t hat um I'm going to start
by just modeling a basic Gaussian
process that ignores the relationship
with population size and then at the
very end we can put this back in with
the Gaussian process and put them
together. I want to emphasize this
because this is how you should engineer
models. You shouldn't just uh try to
develop features in the context of the
complex model you always have. this goes
badly.
Step take a step to the side, develop
the feature in isolation, get it
working, merge it in. Okay, that's the
way to do software development in
science or outside of science for that
matter. Um, create a little sandbox for
your new feature, play with it, get it
to work, uh, then merge it in, and then
you got to do integration tests and all
those sorts of things as well. Uh, so
what do I mean? We're going to model
spatial coariation. We're just going to
start and say that there's some average
rate of tools alpha bar and then each
society has a deviation from that. So,
so far this is not a causal model at
all. This is a purely descriptive model.
Yeah, you see that we're just modeling
means
um and the alphas are log rates, right?
They're rates on the log scale. Uh so,
society has some deviation from the
average across societies and we want to
model those. And so you can think about
these alphas, one for each society as a
big vector. There are 10 societies in
this data set. It's a teaching data set.
I like it because it's small, but also
this is all the data in the world. Like
this is what archaeology is like, right?
I'm pointing at an archaeologist in the
audience. Yeah, exactly. This is one of
the things I actually love about being
an anthropologist is uh uh the the basic
measurement problem is in and of itself
difficult. So like winning data is so
celebrated in our field because there's
so much effort involved in basic data
acquisition. I think that's a really
nice thing. We've got problems in our
field but it's this commitment to
fieldwork and data collection is is
essential and great. And this is why
like each one of the data points in this
table of 10 rows has required years and
years and hundreds and thousands of
person hours of excavation and archival
research in museums. And it's just an
incredible commitment to scholarship
that generates tiny data sets. But as it
turns out, 10 rows you can say things
because the effect the relationship with
population size here is massive. But we
want to we want to think about spatial
coariation. Okay. So we're going to
think about these as a vector of link
10. There's 10 parameters and we're
going to model them all together from a
common prior. That prior is a
multivariant normal. It's a
10-dimensional multivariant normal
with a vector of means that are zero. So
that the the mean is alpha bar, right?
That's what this does. This defines them
as offsets from alphabar.
And then there's this coariance matrix
capital k or kappa which called the
kernel usually. And this is where the
action happens in a Gaussian process
which is what we're building. we do uh
we model that uh the relationship among
the alphas using this coariance matrix
and this is where space is going to
enter. So let's draw a 10-dimensional
coariance matrix. This is what it looks
like right this is what you see in your
dreams or your nightmares when you think
about gaseium processes. This is a 10x10
coariance matrix. The diagonal is a
bunch of sigma squares. Those are the
variances.
Um and the off diagonal is the focus of
our interest. So these K12, K13, these
are co-variances between the different
societies.
So there's a lot of them. How many?
Count them quick.
Anybody got a number? No, there are 45
of them. [laughter] Okay. There's no
reason you should know that, but there's
a formula for this. I think it's in the
book. Um, yeah, it's got some, you know,
it's got some exclamation points in it.
Yeah. Um, should we say bang? By the
way, when you're dictating computer code
and you there's an exclamation point,
you you say the word bang, right? So,
three bang is three factorial. I had a
math teacher who told me that. I don't
know if it's true. Question.
>> Yeah, there is there is an issue I've
always had with auto correlation with
special.
>> So, I know this is the to deal with it.
But my problem is um essentially you're
just categorizing every different
geographic geographic area as you have
the coins from
yeah for example but so this put it in
in separate categories and that's fine
maybe for islands surely for ponds when
we were the frogs whatever but
>> sometimes that think for example you're
in Germany and France and you separate
the German and France
But surely the two cities that are in
the frontier 5 kilometers away from each
other, one in France, one in Germany
would be closer that the German city to
the other side of the German city.
>> Yeah. Yeah.
>> So by separating them in two sides.
>> Yeah. I think your critique is the
coarseness of it. Right. It's because uh
I'm going to make this point later when
I uh very soon actually when I compare
Gaussian processes to other approaches.
This approach could work for any
resolution of space you like because
it's just points and the points it's
continuous. The Gaussian process works
on a continuous field. So this matrix is
defined on these particular points. But
you could squive you could say like
Tonga is not one point. Let's model the
different islands of Tonga and then it
would make the matrix bigger but the
code stays the same.
>> You would have a huge
>> Yeah. Yeah. But that's fine. That's
totally fine. It just runs slower.
[laughter]
But it actually works fine. Um this is a
a big issue with other spatial
autocorrelation models is they you have
to define a network a graph network for
neighbors and then those limitations are
how many neighbors it has has a big
effect on the autocorrelation estimates
whereas here that has no effect at all
because there's no definition of
neighbor here. There's a continuous
field and every island affects every
other mediated by distance. So you can
define the points however you like. Um I
think I've got a slide in like three
slides where I want to problematize
this. Yeah, but this is a great
question. Absolutely. And yeah, and
again big big oceanic societies like
Tonga probably you don't want to treat
it as one point, but the archaeological
resolution I don't think is is good
enough to do much with it.
>> Um but still we we we could we have uh
options there. Okay, that's a good
point. I agree with you completely. Um
uh yes, what's a Gaussian process? This
is this is an unching name for a very
charming family of statistical uh
processes that have lots of great
properties and their main drawback is
just that they're slow. They're
computationally intensive but you know
computers are getting faster and faster
all the time and there are
approximations to Gaussian processes
which work almost as well as the
idealized version as well. So you can
speed them up. Um what is a Gaussian
process? It is if you look this up I
think on Wikipedia this is what they
call it. It's an infinite dimensional
generalization of multivariant normal
distributions. Well, that's helpful,
right? What does that mean?
Well, you know, you you think you have a
normal distribution and then I told you,
well, we can make it a multivariant
normal distribution and that was really
exciting. And now we have an infinite
dimensional multivariant normal
distribution. Uh what does that mean? Uh
the thing I just showed you was only 10
x 10. That doesn't look like infinity.
But this is the thing about your your
question Alfredo is that uh that matrix
actually implies the ability to make
predictions for any spatial point in the
Pacific even but it's not in the
training data set. And that's a nice
thing about that's where the infinite
dimensional comes from. Gaussian
processes generalize regularly to points
that aren't in the training set. They
could be in between, they could be
outside um and they will make
generalizations. Other spatial
autocorrelation models have a really
hard time doing that. That's the one of
the first advantages of the Gaussian
process. So the infinite dimensional is
there's an infinite number of points in
the field and the posterior will define
a prediction for any of them. That's why
it's an infinite dimensional
distribution. Good times. Yeah. I don't
know the faces are doubtful here. Like
is that did you do you want that from
your model really? Um how do we do it?
Uh um [clears throat] we you so the
reason you so there's this infinite
dimensional coariance matrix. So it's
infinity of rows by infinity columns. Uh
how can we model that? That's an
infinity of parameters. Remember there's
an infinity of infinities, right? So
each one infinitely bigger than the
previous one. Maybe you don't remember
that. Remember is not the word I want to
use here. [laughter] It's true. No. Um
it's true under one definition of limit
theorems and and uh infinities that
that's the case. Um but not all. Uh
that's not what we're modeling. uh
there's only hyperparameters that define
the covariance function among the points
and we model the whole infinite
dimensional coariance matrix with that.
So in the in this case how many two two
parameters and we can model the infinite
dimensional coariance matrix. So that
makes it achievable. Yeah. Uh so right
what is this this these these parameters
model something called the kernel
function. I'll show you pictures of it
as we go along. uh what the colonel's
job is a function to give you the
covariance between any pair of points
as a function of their distance defined
as you determine it right so the you
think distance may be simple but it
depends on what surface you're on right
the Pacific is big and uh it might be
some sort of travel distance that
matters I'm not going to do that I'm
going to use luf d distance as we call
it the the if you could fly a straight
great circle on the surface of the
earth. That's the distance I'm going to
give you. So that's not a straight line
because a straight line would take you
through the wa ocean. You would drown.
Keep that in mind. The earth is curved.
Um there are other spaces where the
distance may be defined differently, but
that's up to you depending upon your
hypothesis. Uh distance can also be
time.
Yeah. Remember time's a dimension.
Einstein told us that. Yeah. Uh
uh there are lots of things. Yeah. Um it
can be just difference. you the distance
could be age.
That's often one thing that you can do
with Gaussian processes too is just
model differences between any coariant.
Um okay, so what this establishes is
that these are kind of continuous
ordered categories. And what's going to
effectively happen, you guessed it,
there's going to be regularization and
partial pooling, but it's going to be
localized that points that are closer to
one another are going to pull
information more than points that are
distance. And that's often a really
great thing to do. So again, think about
the example with age. Now, we'll come
back to space in a moment because there
the physical metaphor is easy for you.
But with age, there's no physical
metaphor. But when you've got a sample
and there's individuals a bunch of ages
and you're modeling, say um effects of
education on wages or something boring
like that, boring but essential. Um you
you've got finite samples in each age
group. uh you want to pull strength
across the whole data set, but you don't
want to pool 15 year olds with 60 year
olds. Uh individuals in close age groups
are going to share compounds and other
cohort effects that are unmeasured. And
so you want to group them together.
Yeah. More than other kinds. Does that
make some sense? And that's what's going
to happen here. Splines do the same kind
of thing. There's a bunch of ways to do
local smoothing where you get partial
pooling at local scales uh that you
define. Okay. Oh, sorry. This is the
slide in which I say this. Yeah, lots of
ways to do smoothing. So why Gaussian
processes? There are a lot fewer choices
with Gaussian processes. And it's my
experience that people don't like
choices. No, I I like making choices
when they're easy to justify, but the
Gaussian process is quite is generally
applicable and nice because it doesn't
make choices which are essentially ad
hoc and not related to generative
models. That's the problem with a lot of
these things. So there there are no
knots. Lots of splines require defining
points in the continuous space that
you're going to pivot about. those are
called knots. Um other kinds like radial
basis functions use things called
centers and you need to define where
they are as well. Uh and then just the
existence of basis functions which are
arbitrary polomials in many of the most
uh popular approaches um represent
another set of ad hoc choices that are
not related to your generative model and
Gaussian process don't require any of
these choices because there's just an
infinite wiggly function space and we're
going to get a posterior distribution
for the whole thing. That's what we're
going to do.
Um, Gaussian processes are also more
agnostic about the generative process
than despite having process in their
name than other approaches. Um,
coariance can arise from
crosscontamination of the outcome
variable, right? Like a lot of often in
physical systems things just diffuse
spatially uh and concentrations will be
associated for that reason and it can
also arise because of unmeasured common
influences which are spatially
associated. The Gaussian process doesn't
make strong assumptions about those
differences. Other approaches do so. So
this is one of the reasons that it's
it's nice um for basians like me. It's
really comforting that the prior is not
on the functions themselves but on the
properties of the functions on families
of functions. That's what the kernel is.
We put priors on the kernel function
which is a function about coariance but
the exact shape of the function is free.
Okay. Oh yes. And this is me. This meme
is me. Is this meme too old? Do people
know this meme? No. You've seen it.
Okay. Yeah, it's old. Thank you. You can
be honest with me. I won't feel it's
hurt. um old anime memes.
Uh okay, someone asked me via email to
comment on on other uh models for
modeling spatial autocorrelation and why
Gaussian processes are superior. So this
is like a focused in um view of the
previous slide. The most common
approaches to uh spatial autocorrelation
include these things like simultaneous
and conditional auto reggressive models
often called SAR and CAR. You may have
seen these things in papers. They're
very widely used in lots of fields. Um
uh and they can work, but they're very
fiddly and there's just as big a
literature criticizing them because they
require a bunch of ad hoc choices and
they often have really weird residuals.
Uh, one of the things about them that
that we don't like, and this relates to
your question, Alfredo, is that they
require predefined neighbors and spatial
weights. So, for example, you wanted to
model um some feature of New York City,
you get this grid on the right where you
have to go in and actually define a
bunch of points and define that who's a
neighbor of who because it's in in a
car, it's just the neighbors that
influence you. Uh, the other thing that
goes on in these models is that it's the
outcomes which influence one another,
which is not true, right? Why is it?
because the outcomes are measured with
error, right? So the there's a latent
surface that we can't see that creates
contamination even if it's the outcomes
that are diffusing. Does that make
sense? Doing measurement error uh in
these kinds of models is really
difficult. Gaussian processes, no
problem, right? Gaussian processes are
defined on a latent scale beneath the
measurement. Yeah. Does this make some
sense? It's like we don't know the
truth. Yeah. We don't know how many
tools uh Tonga had. we've got an
estimate of it, right? Keep that in
mind. Um,
uh, yeah. Anyway, there's a really big
literature on on these issues, which
isn't to say SAR car models can't work.
It's just they're much finer much more
finicky finickier. I've been in Germany
too long. Uh, more finicky than um than
Gaussian processes. Uh, okay. Gaussian
processes have drawbacks. They're
computationally intensive, but there are
approximations getting better all the
time. Okay, that's enough. uh
advertising, but I was asked to do that
and I think it's actually a good thing
to add to the lecture to talk about that
alternative approaches. Um in the future
I could update this lecture to actually
show you like a car on the same data
set, but I I did not have time to do
that this week. I apologize. All right.
Now, I want to show you some movies um
of Gaussian processes. I've talked about
these mystical things. What does it mean
infinite uh functional space? Gaussian
processes are wiggles uh in the simplest
case through an xy space. We've got some
variable x and we're going to use the
distances between those x's
uh to define uh in the kernel covariance
between points. But the function space
that is the posterior distribution
contains an infinite range of wiggly
functions that are consistent with those
coariances. Uh so that's what I'm
showing you uh on the slide. On the left
we have the xy space and those different
colored curves are draws from the
posterior distribution. I'm going to
start this up in a second. they'll
animate. Um, and we've observed one
point so far and it's there in the
center. So, they all pass through this
point. That's what we know. But the
Gaussian process defines predictions for
every place else. Yeah. And we're
drawing functions that map X to Y. On
the right is the kernel function where
the the horizontal axis is distance from
the X variable. So, you take two points
on the X- axis and compute their
distance. Yeah. Which is just their
absolute deviation in this case. And
then this function defines on the
vertical their expected coariance.
Natural, right? You think about this all
the time. No, it's a little weird, but
you get used to it. So when we start
moving these things, you can see I'm
just drawing repeatedly from the
posterior distribution different
functions and interpolating between them
to make a smooth animation. We can add
another point. Now we add 2. Now you see
all the functions are anchored for both
those points, but we get predictions
between them. the predictions between
them are less wiggly, wander less than
than as we move away on the far left or
the far right because the covariance is
constrained by the coariance function,
right? It can't be too big.
Yeah, as points get further apart, they
can be more and more difference because
their coariance declines, but when
they're close, the function between
them, so this is the infinite
dimensional part. Again, every point
between 0.1 and point 2 gets a
prediction, and that's what the curves
are.
Yeah.
Um, so here's the distance between 0.1
and point 2 and I can project that
distance right over to the other graph.
Do you see it on the on the horizontal
axis? Um, and then we can go up to the
coariance function and we get the
expected coariance between those two
points. Now, of course, in reality,
we're learning the coariance function at
the same time we're learning the
functions. But let's just let's just
imagine we knew the co the coariance
function for the moment because that's
the mental gymnastics are too much. Is
this good so far? Again, it doesn't have
to make total sense, just enough that we
can keep moving. Um, then we can add
more points. Animate this up. Uh, when
we add, see all this wiggling that's
going on. See how it's wiggler on the
right? But then we add three and that
anchors it again. Uh, and it has to pass
through all three of these points. And
we've got covariances defined for all
the pairs of points from the kernel
function for an infinite number of
points, right? Depending upon the
distance. Um, yeah. And so they'll
continue to wiggle, but you see because
the covariance, the maximum covariance
for some of these is fairly low, it
doesn't wiggle very much between the
points, but on the ends, it wiggles a
lot. And this is a nice feature is that
it's it's very uncertain in places where
it hasn't seen points.
Yeah. And it's locally smoothing. And
you can see that in the lack of
wiggliness, that's a technical term,
between the in the in the in the center
of the x-axis of the graph. Um in
realistic cases there's also measurement
error. We don't know the points for
sure. Remember I told you that. Wait
there's a question.
>> Yeah.
>> So to make sure that I understand this
in an empirical case. So say that these
three points are three islands.
>> Yeah.
>> Let's say 10 points 10 islands. So you
would be able to predict in the space of
those 10 islands. But if you go away
from that space then it would become
>> very uncertain. Yeah. The the Gaussian
process would the Gaussian process would
not have confident predictions outside
>> within distances.
depending if you go away from those.
>> Yeah, it depends upon the coariance
function of course, but that intuition
is correct. Yeah, absolutely. Um uh
these this graph is is distances. So
it's a little weird because it's like
distances between islands that would be
on the xy graph. You have to like think
about you've got a coordinate space and
you translate it into distances and then
you could put them on here. Um okay, say
usually we don't know the y variable
with certainty because we've just got a
measurement of it. So there's
measurement error that's modeled
simultaneously. And so I'm just redoing
this example for you now with
measurement error. You can see how the
the functions aren't constrained to pass
exactly through the points now, but
they're in the neighborhood. Depends
upon the amount of measurement error.
Yeah. And of course, we can estimate the
measurement error simultaneously as we
estimate the functions and the kernel
function, but I've I've chosen to
animate only some of it at once. It's
all coming soon. The last animation is
all of it. All right. We're going to
layer it in. Is this good so far? You
get the idea. I spent hours making these
animations. Uh, so that's why you're
seeing them. I don't know if they're
useful, but you you get to see them. Um,
the code to make these, by the way, is
in the scripts folder on the course
repository. You can make these
animations. Um, you just draw from the
posterior and sample a function and draw
it. That's really all it is.
>> Just to check on the left graph, we
don't see distance. It is just the
values for X.
>> It's just the X values. That's right.
It's just their locations. Yeah. This
example we're going to go to has X and Y
coordinates. This has latitude and
longitude. So it's that would be a hard
example to illustrate this way, but you
got to translate it. This is just like
only the the longitude. Longitude is
this way, right? On the globe, I forget.
[snorts] Yeah, I think so. Um, okay, I
want to get through this. Uh, yeah. So,
that this is the idea. It's it's also
doing local smoothing. So you can see if
the coariance function is is doesn't
allow the functions to be super wiggly
such that they can pass through every
point then if you've got points that
disagree like this and are quite
dispersed it the functions will pass
through the kind of center of gravity of
them. And if we change the coariance so
it can uh so it's higher it gets even
smoother. That's what just happened
there. Um and I think in this animation
then I let it go back down and you'll
see that they get wigglier again. Yeah.
And then they get wigglier again. Um,
that's much easier to see in this one.
This is the last animation. Thanks for
indulging me. Uh, this is just a single
draw from the posterior to make it
easier to see. We've got three points
simultaneously modeling the measurement
error because the amount of measurement
error uh posterior measurement error
will depend upon how wiggly the curve
can be. And then the coariance function
is being sampled at the same time. So
you notice when the the coariance
function has rapidly declining
covariance then the curves get super
wiggly and they can pass through the
points and the measurement error goes
down. Yeah.
Um but when it's really smooth like
there then uh the measurement error has
to be bigger in order for it uh the
curve to be consistent with the data.
Yeah. And we want to get the posterior
distribution for all of these things at
once. And that's what we do in bays. And
you're used to this now. Highdimensional
models, we can do this sort of stuff.
But Gaussian processes are actually
fairly
old traditional machine learning models.
They've been in use for a long time. I
like to joke that the world runs on
Gaussian processes. Telemetry systems,
radar, all are Gaussian processes
because you've got an imperfect
measurement uh that's changing
dynamically and you want to get rapidly
get a good estimate of it. And Gaussian
processes were designed for these sorts
of physical systems originally.
Um, so like your DHL delivery truck, its
GPS location is updated using a Gaussian
process. All GPS's use Gaussian
processes
of some kind. Um, okay.
So the tactic with a Gaussian process is
not to focus on the linear model like we
have up to this point where all the
action is, but now on the coariance and
we want to smuggle as much of the action
into the coariance as possible. And so
that means you have modeling choices um
about the shape of the kernel. And the
kernels I've showed you so far are the
most common kind, the so-called
quadratic or L2 kernel. It's just a
Gaussian. It's a half of a Gaussian
distribution.
Yeah. Uh this is often a really great
kernel to use. And uh that's just the
formula for a Gaussian distribution. And
there are two parameters to this. one
that determines the maximum coariance,
the height on the far left, and the
other that determines the rate of decay,
how quickly coariance declines with
distance. Another extremely common one
is the Ornstein Oenbeck uh model. Uh
this is often called damped uh brownie
in motion. There are physical this model
first appeared in literature because
there are actually physical processes
which produce this in expectation. Um
and it's not Gaussian. It's just the
absolute value, not the square. So it
declines exponentially with distance
rather than in the smooth Gaussian bell
curve way. Um, this one this one is used
a lot. I think it's the most common kind
of kernel density in phoggenetic
regression, which is what I'd like to
get to at the end of this lecture, but
we'll see
if we can get there. Um, and then
sometimes like when you're modeling
time, uh, you want a periodic function.
No problem. Gaus will play and just just
put uh a squared sign function in here.
And so this is like dal cycles. So I was
I was assisting a colleague um some
years ago with modeling human behavior
across the day and they had a bunch of
behavioral samples throughout the day.
These sort of studies now where you put
little microphones on people and they
wear it constantly and then you model
their speech rates of speech throughout
the day. And so you get dial cycles and
time is the most determining thing about
how much people speak. So you want to
model that basic a single intercept
across 24 hours is not very useful,
right? You can do a lot better than
that. There's other examples of this
too. It could be annual cycles, lots of
things. But periodic Gaussian processes
work fine. They're all over the
literature. Um,
okay. We're not doing uh these. We've
got this. We've got oceanic islands,
oceanic societies rather. uh at the top
level this model is just a plus on
regression I showed you before we've got
log rates there's an average across all
societies alpha bar and our vector of 10
offsets uh the alpha sub 1 2 through 10
and this multivariant normal 10
dimensional and multivariant normal uh
with this 10x 10 coariance matrix and
the entries of this coariance matrix K
I'm going to call them little k i j
where i and j are societies
yeah a row and a column um is given by
this quadratic or Gaussian kernel where
ADA squar will be the maximum coariance
and row squar will be the rate of
decline and dig squared is just the
distance and it's squared because it's
Gaussian right that's what makes it
Gaussian
if you just make it d then you have the
ulenbeck model and I encourage the
student as an exercise at home to try
that and see what's different about it
okay does this make some sense I see a
question
>> row is not the coronation
It's just the rate of
>> It's just the rate of decline.
>> Doesn't translate. Okay.
>> Yeah, exactly. It's a rate of decline.
Um, we need prior on ADA and row. Um, I
I put uh yield
lognormal prior on alpha there and not
on alpha on on lambda in a sense. And uh
and then ADA squared I give an
exponential two and row squared to an
exponential 0.5. And you might ask
yourself, but why? You have no
intuitions about these priors. You
shouldn't. You're a psychologically
healthy human being. You should not have
priors about these parameters. How do
you know what they imply? You need to do
prior predictive simulation. Uh in a
function like this, um ADA and row
aren't aren't really identifiable in the
data in isolation, but functions of them
are. So they're going to be highly
correlated in the posterior. So you want
to do prior predictive simulations to
understand the types of of coariance
relationships you you've got in the
prior how quickly it decays. Um the
input into this is this distance matrix
I show you on this slide and that these
are the little digs.
Um I calculated I said the airplane
flying distance on a globe. We're not
passing through the water on a globe. Um
for these islands and then I've created
this matrix which is in thousands of
kilometers.
Yeah. Uh and you'll notice the diagonal
is all zeros, right? Because those
that's when the row and the column are
the same and then you've got the
distances. Uh so that's what gets
entered into it. So we can do prior
predictive simulation here. Here's just
a little bit of code to do that. Mind
you, you just I'm just drawing 30
samples from the prior 30 ADAS and 30
rows, 30 ADA squares and 30 row squares.
And then I just plot the functions um
that are implied by each and I show this
on the right. So we've got uh functions
that decay slowly. Remember the x-axis
here is thousands of kilometers.
Okay. So in the that might sound like a
lot to you, but to a to a Pacifica
person and maybe not a lot because you
know they they're good at sailing
historically speaking. Um they found
Hawaii and New Zealand, so they'll find
anything if it's out there, right? And
some of them decay fast. So this prior
is is quite flexible. It's a huge range.
I'm not prepared to argue this is a
great prior, but I wanted to show you a
way to examine the implications of it.
Um, and then later when you do prior
sensitivity checks again, you can vary
these parameters, you can look at the
prior implications, you can refit the
data, you can see if your inferences are
sensitive to the priors on the kernel,
and sometimes they are. And so you want
to know that. Uh, all right. So this is
the whole model.
Um, and uh, we're ready to run the
thing. The ulam code for this is not too
surprising. I just want to highlight the
bit of the code that does the the
Gaussian process prior. Um this is just
some uh convenience functions to make it
work. The alphas are just defined as
multivariant normal ordinary
multivariate normal distribution. A
vector of 10 alphas and a multivariant
normal with a with zero there in ulam
notation means the whole vector is zero.
It's just for convenience. Um and then
this coariance matrix K. Um and then I
define the coariance matrix from this L2
Gaussian process function. And all that
coariance GPL2 function does inside
Ulam. You can look at the stand code and
see this is it just goes through and
calculates each of the entries using the
distance matrix. So it's really exactly
the formulas that are on the previous
slide. Yeah. Well, it's it's the formula
that's on this slide, right? You see how
the the KIJS are defined? Uh uh
coariance GPL2 just loops through them
all and does that. That's really all it
does. I don't want to make you write
that loop. Yeah, there's nothing fancy
about it. There's no there's no uh
programming tricks involved. That's
really all it is. We run this, we get um
posterior distribution for a bunch of
stuff that's uninterpretable as us
always. I show you this these marginal
posterior distributions to remind you
that it's very difficult to understand a
model's implications looking at this but
you still want to look at uh uh the
convergence diagnostics the R hat and
the ESS values oh this table this is
updated um the experimental branch of
the rethinking package which is on
GitHub you could install it if you want
is always a few pushes ahead of the main
branch and uh I'm using the experimental
branch always because that's how I find
bugs with
Um, and in the experimental branch, the
precy output now gives ESS bulk and ESS
tail as default output. Remember, I had
that whole thing in an earlier lecture
about the difference between bulk and
tail. Uh, so I thought, well, what I
should just put them as default output
because they're both computed by Stan.
So, it's easy to add them. So, I'm I'm
I'm uh thinking about doing this
everywhere and also calling NFS now
because that's what the literature has
standardized on. Okay.
Um, what do we get from this? Here I
compare the kernel functions. I think
this is like 20 draws from the posterior
and also from the prior to remind you
where the prior was. So the prior
allowed functions which had really high
um coariances for close islands and some
really slowly declining coariances as
well. Those are the black curves and the
red curves are draws from the posterior.
You see there's less coariance on
average in the posterior than there is
was allowed in the prior. The prior is
very diffuse. Yeah, allowed some really
high things. Um, but it's positive.
Close islands have some expected
coariance and it declines quite slowly
over thousands of kilometers. Yeah.
Which I think students of oceanic
history would not be surprised by
because we know there was lots of long
range contact uh between places. Maybe
not Hawaii and the others because
Hawaii's in no place out there. Sorry,
Hawaii. But you're really far away from
the Polynesian cluster there around
Tonga. Um, and then on the right, I'm
trying to draw this so that you can see
using shading what the implied
coariances are. So, I'm going to zoom in
on this map so you can see it a little
better. This is now a longitude latitude
map. Yeah, it's it's it's flattened
though, so it's not like a globe. So, I
apologize for that. But, um, and then
the red points are societies and the
size is the log population size.
So, you can see the size of the circles.
Hawaii big, right? Um and then the lines
drawn between between them are the um
posterior coariances uh uh that are
estimated inside the coariance matrix,
right? Because we get a posterior
distribution for the coariances as well
for the whole coariance matrix. And
that's what you see. And you you can see
that the dark lines are for the close
ones. So the model does think that the
tool sets but for the close societies
are more similar as a consequence of
their spatial location. Yeah,
that's the pattern.
Does this make some sense? Yeah. Okay.
An exciting outcome. Of course, the
point of this was to uh control for
spatial autocorrelation or adjust for
spatial autocorrelation in the presence
of population size. So we want to fold
that back in. Um, I'm not going to spend
a lot of time on this. Just say I do
this in the book and and here's the
model that does it where we put both in.
We've got to put that equilibrium
expression um for the toolkit back in
the model and then put the Gaussian
process draws which adjusts the
expectation um in as a multiplicative
factor as well. Why is this
multiplicative? Because I'm not doing
this on the log scale in this model.
Usually posson models it's log lambda.
Here's just raw lambda, right? um in the
code it's logged but I want I think it's
easier to understand it here if I don't
log at all. So we're exponentiating
alphas because they're on the log scale
right and then it's a multiplicative
factor that adjusts the expectation of
the amount of tools that we expect. Um
and uh uh the good news being that uh in
this model too after accounting for
population size there's still evidence
of spatial coariance. Uh societies are
close to one another are more similar
even after accounting for their
differences in population size but the
relationship with population size is
just so strong in these data that it
doesn't go away. Right? That would be
the that would be the concern of a
reader for such a paper. um as well.
Make sense? Yeah. Okay. This is uh
baby's first uh spatial Gaussian
process. [laughter] Um I wanted to get
across the basic ideas there. For the
last 15 minutes, I want to give you a
glimpse into another kind of distance
you can use with um Gaussian processes
and that is phoggenetic distance. And
the models look very very similar. This
is how flexible Gaussium processes are.
This is the fogyny of primates. There's
some anthropologists in the room. You
should know this, right? You should see
this in your dreams. Anthropologist. Not
you, but others. [laughter]
Right. Sorry. We have a we have a
historian, literature person in the I
don't know. What are you now? I don't
know. You're everything. [laughter]
Yeah. But uh you're not an
anthropologist. Yeah. To your credit.
And but the rest of you have no excuse
not to know this dream. No, I mean I
joke a bit when I I have multiple
degrees in anthropology, unfortunately.
And I was made to memorize this whole
tree during my qualifying exams, you
know. So, it's like I there was a time
when I could just ramble off the names
of lemurs. I mean, I will be in therapy
for decades just over this. But anyway,
no, the I'm an anthropologist. We study
primates. We study primates because
humans are narcissists and we want to
understand our evolution and primates
are related to us. So, we study them.
That's it. Right? I think studying
primates in and of themselves is also
valuable for the primatologists
listening to this. It's not just the
narcissism that motivates it, right?
Chimpanzees are interesting in and of
themselves regardless of what they tell
us about human evolution. Let me stick
up for that point for a moment. Lemurs
as well. Lemurs are freaks, so they're
definitely worth studying. Um, sorry,
I'm I should stop talking. All right, so
um, so right, we've got the apes here,
uh, which we usually focus on, but
there's a bunch of African and Asian
monkeys. There are the South American
monkeys. Um, and then you've got lemurs
and tarsier tarscers. Just a few tars
species. Then a bunch of lemurs. So many
lemurs. They're all on Madagascar just
jammed in there in the 30% of the island
that's not deforested yet. So many
lemurs. It's incredible. There are as
many lemurs as there are South American
monkeys. It's just incredible how many
lemurs there are. Vastly underststudied.
This is my boost for lemur people. Yeah,
they're really interesting. and then
galos and lorises which look like
aliens.
Yeah. Um
so uh there are the fogyny here is is an
attempt statistically to estimate the
evolutionary common evolutionary history
of all these species. We know that all
the primates are more closely related to
one another than they are to any other
mammal. That they share a common
ancestor that joins up with basil
mammals before the dinosaurs went
extinct. That's how old primates are.
primates, rodents, those orders of
mammals uh originated before the before
the meteor hit the yuckatan, right? So
that's how old this stuff is. Um and uh
what effect does that common history
have on patterns of life history traits
um among the primates and in particular
the obsession in studying primate fogyny
is brain size because again I told you
humans are narcissists and what's
different about us? We have big brains
or at least we think we do, [snorts]
right? And
the data set for I'm using here is a
data set I got from Sally Street. I give
you the citation at the bottom that she
put together with great effort um for a
few papers she's done uh on this topic.
It's called primates 301 because there's
301 species in it. Uh it's it's mainly
life history traits, also some
behavioral traits. We're going to focus
only on adult female body mass in grams.
Um brain in cubic centimeters and uh
group size um and uh in the wild group
size in the wild. There's a lot of
missing data which is very typical in
comparative biology. There are a lot of
species where you don't have all the
traits. Um there's also a lot of
measurement error. Uh some species the
traits are measured better than others
and for some traits we don't have good
measures for any species.
um if we're being honest. Uh and there's
almost certainly a bunch of unobserved
compounding because this is not an
experimental situation.
Yeah. Like most of biology. Yeah. Unless
you're doing, you know, plant genetics,
then you can do experiments. People
don't care what you do to plants.
Crisper them to hell. No one cares,
right? But um so this is a realistic
data set. We're going to ignore this
realism today. There's a future lecture
where I talk about measurement error and
missing data. I'm going to return to the
same data set and we're going to try and
deal with some of these problems. Okay,
that's a promise I make to you in the
future. Um, okay. Uh, so let's just work
with the complete cases. So I'm deleting
all the cases where we don't have those
three variables and you see we basically
get half the data set.
Yeah. Um, this is very common in
comparative biology. Uh so the the three
variables we want to focus on are brain
volume, uh adult female body mass, um
and uh group size. And these variables,
like most life history variables, are
strongly correlated. They're all
correlated, right? So you know what's
coming. How do we deal with these
correlation patterns? And you you've
stuck with me this long. So you know,
you can't look at these uh at the data
itself and determine the directionality
of causal influences. You've got to make
some assumptions about what's
influencing what. Um, and this is my
standard rant about what I call causal
salad in evolutionary ecology. Uh,
unfortunately very widespread practice
of just letting multiple regression
decide. Uh, you put stuff in there, you
get some coefficients, and you tell a
story. But those coefficients are
consistent with different generative
models that are actually quite different
biological stories. This is familiar to
all of you if you you've stuck with this
course this long. Um, so there's this
phrase you see in the literature which
always makes my eye twitch called
controlling for fileogyny as [snorts]
if. Right now we're going that's it.
We're going to control for fellogyny
here. But the interpretation of what
that means is actually quite subtle. So
if you'll uh uh indulge me, I'm going to
spend probably the next five minutes
just trying to unpack what controlling
for failogyny means in a sense and then
I can give you an impression about how a
phoggenetic regression is really just a
Gaussian process using the distances on
the fogyny
which is really all it is the classic
every time you see someone say I did a
foggenetic regression they're doing a
fast frequentist approximation to a
Gaussian process on the phoggenetic
tree. Um, and there's not necessarily
anything wrong with that. It's just it
gets over interterpreted I think quite
often. Um, you still need a causal
model. So in this case uh what this
literature is focused on is this thing
called the social brain hypothesis. Um
where uh group size is meant is
hypothesized to be an influence on on
brain size. that is that species that
have social lives have bigger brains
because that requires a bunch of
strategic cognition. Uh and so primates
in general have bigger brains than other
mammals adjusted for body size. Um
because they tend to live in social
groups, most of them, not all of them.
They're they're also solitary primates
or primates that only live in pairs for
most of their lives. Um the the confound
that is obvious to everybody is adult
body mass because obviously the brain
scales with body mass. Uh and there's a
substantial literature suggesting that
there's also causal influence of body
mass on group size. Um the most popular
hypothesis I think still is that uh body
mass is very strongly associated with
whether you live in the trees or not.
Species that live in trees are smaller.
Yeah. Uh, even howler monkeys. If there
were terrestrial howler monkeys, I I I
hate to think how big they'd be, right?
Um, think about gorillas, right? They
can climb trees, but they're a
terrestrial species. Yeah, howler
monkeys are are are aroreal gorillas
from South America. I should stop
talking. Someone's going to send me hate
mail about this, but um uh so it's
plausible that body mass also influences
group size, right? Because if you live
in trees, it constrains your group size
as opposed to living on the ground. And
terrestrial primates have bigger groups
on average. That's the evidence. But
again, you can't tell from the data. And
there's lots of different DAGs you could
draw which would be consistent with
different patterns. And people have
verbal versions of this in the
literature. And that's okay. But we
should just be more explicit, I think,
about what what we're assuming. Um uh in
addition, you know, unobserved
confounding additionally uh in these
situations. Okay, let's return to
fogyny. The the background idea with
controlling profilogyny is that if we
take this as our motivating DAG, um
there are unmeasured common influences
on these variables across species that
create similarity in these life history
traits and particularly between closely
related species and those those could be
arise from a number of things. Uh but
the driving hypothesis is it's their
common evolutionary history and it can
act two ways that that evolutionary
history can generate these unmeasured
common causes uh that that generate
similarities. It can be because really
they just didn't diverge very long ago
and so they're still similar. Evolution
is gradually making them different but
since they they're close relatives
they're similar just because of their
common descent. The other way is that
evolutionary history generates niche
conservatism. species tend to exhibly
related species tend to experience
common selection pressures because their
traits favor them living in the same
kind of environments, right? And that's
there. It's not directly causally their
their shared descent that's making them
similar. It's that selection keeps them
similar because of their way of life.
Does that make sense? Yeah. Uh and these
all fit into this kind of background
unmeasured common causes. Um, what's
really going on? Of course, if we wanted
to think about simulating evolution,
which every major file genetics package
will let you do, you can do simulations.
I'm going to do it in a minute if I've
got enough time today. Um, uh, every
phoggenetics package will let you
simulate evolution on a tree or or
simulate new trees. Is that some point
in the distant past, we had um some
proto primate. And here's my uh profile
for it. I don't know what this is. It's
probably some kind of lemur.
Right? And uh there are two variables.
There's its group size and there's its
brain size at time one let's say. And
then there are divergences through
evolutionary time and we get speciation.
Um and uh there are causal influences.
So the the uh each trait influences
itself. That's the black arrows on this
graph. So in the future time um the uh
species diverges into two species. down.
Notice there's only two species here,
but there's four points because there's
two traits. I know it's confusing, but
this is actually what goes on in
foggenetic evolution, right? And so
group size at time one influences uh for
species one influences the group sizes
for species one and two. And brain size
for species one in the distant past
influences the brain sizes of of all of
its descendants um all of its daughter
species. And the red arrows are causal
effects. So if we assume here that group
size is influencing brain size, then the
group size in the past is also an
influence on those brain sizes. Does
this make some sense? And and this just
goes forward in time, right? Over and
over again, the group sizes keep
influencing brain sizes. And the past
group sizes and brain sizes influence
the current group sizes and brain sizes
through time. And we can get more
speciation. Yay. Right? We get some
gibbons
and things in there. And it goes on.
This is an evolutionary history, right?
This is this is our this is what we
think of uh when we do evolutionary
biology the actual causal processes and
if we had all those measurements right
if we had all the way down this tree all
those measurements back in time it would
be a fairly straightforward time series
model to estimate causal effects I say
fairly because it's still difficult to
do causal inference in a time series
it's it's not that hard but it would be
easier than what our actual task is
which is all we know are the tips
we don't even know the tree. Yeah. All
of this stuff in the background is just
kind of faded away from us and we just
observe species traits in the common
era. Seems impossible and yet it's not.
You can make inference in this case. I
think it's a tremendous achievement that
we could do any kind of phoggenetic
inference at all. Um so there are two
problems uh that that we have to tackle
at the same time to make it to do
inference about what causes the the
distributions of species traits um for
extent species that is existing species.
The first is what's the fogyny at all?
That's one statistical procedure that
I'm not going to do here. Right? That
would be a that would be multiple
lectures fascinating lectures but we're
just not going to do that. Um and the
second which we will talk about is how
to use it to model causes. Uh um I would
want to say a little bit about
phoggenetic regression though it's it's
a very mature field with a lot of really
mature problems that are still not
solved. Uh and people who work in it
know that you'll the literature is very
open about the problems in inference. Um
it just goes on and on. Uh I think it's
in that sense it's nice. People who are
not specialists tend to use blackbox
software and not understand the
limitations. But that's true of
everything in biology. So I don't want
to single out phogenetic inference for
that reason. Um genomics has of course
helped a lot with this. The genomic era
has revised a lot of fogynies and taught
us fascinating things that we didn't
realize before like whales or cows. I
mean that's that's kind of a rough way
to say it but whales are related to
cows. They're carnivorous sea cows. Just
think of it that way. um fascinating
sorts of things. [clears throat] Uh also
revised other issues. Um but there's
lots of uncertainty about the fogyny uh
and there uh multiple reasons for that.
Two of the biggest ones in my opinion
are that the evolutionary process across
the tree is not stationary. Rates of
innovation and extinction are not the
same in all parts of the tree. They can
they can be state dependent. They depend
upon traits like body size. Uh and
that's very that makes the inference
problem much harder. Uh second fogynies
don't exist. Uh what I mean is there's
no there's no single fogyny for the
whole species because an individual is
an ephemeral bag of genes. Evolutionary
biologists think like this all the time
but normal people don't. But uh every
every locus in the genome has its own
fogyny in principle and because of
recombination they have their own
evolutionary histories.
Yeah. And different species can
interbreed over millennia, sometimes
millions of years, and still be
morphologically distinct. And during
that time, genes will be passing between
them and entangling the fogyny in even
messier ways. And that's how wild
populations really work. And so this
idea of a single fogyny, which we see
all the time, is a convenient
regularized abstraction to tell us
something about the center of gravity of
the total demographic history of these
organisms. And that's not a bad thing,
but we shouldn't think it exists. It's a
social construction, right? It's it's a
dimension reduction on a very highly
complicated problem. And there are
people who study the individual gene
trees. There's a literature on that. But
this the so-called resolved bifurcating
fogynes are fictions that are dimension
reductions. They're like principal
component analysis. There's more like a
factor analysis. It's like a factor
analysis of the evolutionary history. As
long as you keep that in mind, I think
they're fine. Um they can still be
wrong. uh cultural linguistic fogynies
uh are even more social constructions
because there's no agreed upon way to
even reconstruct them. We know the the
laws of transmission in cultural and
linguistic fogynies are not the same as
genes. No one disagrees with that, but
most published cultural linguistic
fogynies are just used uh just word
lists put into software made to analyze
genomes. Uh and so mo they're they're
unconvincing to even experts in many of
the areas. Yeah. Um what we really need
uh and lots of people in those fields
say this are new inference tools which
take account of the special properties
of languages and cultural items instead
of just treating them like genes. Um and
there are people who work on that I'm
happy to say including at this institute
and so it'll get better. Um okay that's
my little sermon on that. Uh we're out
of time so I think next time maybe I
pick up with this. There's just a few
more slides left in this topic and then
I can start talking about I think
measurement error which just brings it
up back up. Um, thank you for your
indulgence. I know it's a lot of slides
and lots of wiggling but maybe it came
across okay. Yeah. And you got something
from it. Okay, go forth. Have a good
weekend. I'll see you next week.